---
tags: [networking]
---

# Cable Modem

Cable Modem or Hybrid Fibre-Coaxial Cable (HFC) is a
[Broadband](202208311155.md) technology that utilises the existing
[coaxial](202302161846.md) cabling on the individual subscribers' side which was
providing just the TV services before the technology with the combination of new
[Fibre-Optic Cable](202209021233.md) installed on central facilities. Thus, it
shows a hierarchical structure of networking. It is capable of offering
high-speed connectivity as fast as Ethernet, which means it can run at the speed
of greater than 10Mbps. However, since the connection must be permanently
established, dialling multiple locations is not possible. Instead, it will
directly connect to the Internet. Distance is not a limitation factor to it
since the provider can easily amplify the signals if necessary.

The cable spectrum is already divided up into several hundred 6MHz blocks
(capable of carrying around 30Mbps of data) to accommodate various TV channels.
The provider needs only to assign one or more blocks for downstream data (for
downloading) to the user. The lower end of the spectrum is divided into 2MHz
blocks as upstream data (for uploading) instead, and the provider will assign
one or more blocks to the user accordingly. Both upstream and downstream will be
aggregated by a **Cable Modem Termination System (CMTS)** located at the cable
provider. It plays similar role from [DSLAM](202208312036.md) where the
conversion of digital signal to analogue signal (and vice versa) are done.
However, CMTS has limited number slots (typically 1000 of them) which allow a
fix number of subscribers for the service.

There is no need to worry about the interference of the data and TV signals as
the televisions already have their own filtering. However, due the nature of the
cabling as a shared medium, if there is a high bandwidth use by the other
subscribing neighbours, it might affect the performance of the network. Another
factor that can affect network performance in cable modem is lower contracted
data rates or media impairments.

Often used terminology are [Trunk](202303272107.md) and [Feeder Circuit](202303272108.md).
