---
tags: [networking]
---

# Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM)

ATM is a connection-oriented [Wide Area Network (WAN)](202207150833.md)
technology operating at [Data Link Layer](202206131651.md) with fixed length
cells (essentially a packet) that can integrate different traffic types such as
voice, data, and video. It supports both #[Packet Switching](202207150848.md)
and #[Circuit Switching](202207150846.md) functionalities. The basic components
in an ATM network are ATM [switches](202207061800.md) (ATM terminology for
routers), which is responsible for moving cells through the network, and ATM
endpoints, such as workstations, [Router](202207061800.md), data service units
(DSU) etc. However, ATM is complex and expensive, thus largely been succeeded by
[Internet Protocol (IP)](202206151223.md).

Switches are interconnected by point-to-point ATM links, which could come in 2
forms: **User-Network Interface (UNI)** and **Network Node Interface (NNI)**.
The former is used to connect ATM endpoints to ATM switches, whereas the latter
connect ATM switches together. Depend on the type of network (private or public)
the switch reside, it could be further classified as **private** or **public**
interface. Switches also generate data cells that contain data to be transferred
from source to destination and resource-management (RM) cells to convey
[congestion](202209302043.md)-related information among hosts and switches which
interspersed between data cells. The rate of the interspersion by default is one
RM cell for every 32 data cells, but it could be changed. With the help of RM
cell, ATM [congestion control mechanism](202304261755.md) is able to support
both direct feedback by sending RM cell from the switch itself to the source and
network feedback by the destination sending back the RM cell with modified
content. There is a rate-based congestion control named [ATM Available Bit-Rate (ABR)](202305031337.md)
with more detail on how ATM implements congestion control mechanism. Because of
ATM's nature of allowing [per-VC](202208301234.md) state to be stored between
switch and the source, it allows switches to track sender's behaviour.

ATM supports **asynchronous transmission** using an optimised version of
[Time-Division Multiplexing (TDM)](202209091302.md)#. Since in standard TDM, an
end station could not use an idle time slot owned by another end station, this
could result in some inefficiency. Instead of favouring static allocation, ATM
improves it letting the end stations to choose their slot based on **priority**.
The slot that has the highest priority is the primary time slot for that end
station. If the slot is not being used by its primary owner, it can be assigned
to other end station temporarily to transmit data over.

The information or frame transferred by ATM will have a *fixed size* of 53
bytes, where 5 bytes are allocated for header and 48 bytes for information. The
header includes fields like 4-bit generic flow control (GFC), 8-bit or 12-bit
virtual path identifier (VPI), 16-bit virtual channel identifier (VCI), 3-bit
payload type (PT), 1-bit cell loss priority (CLP), and header error control
(8-bit CRC).

**Note**: [Top MPLS label](202207150852.md) can be represented with the
combination of VPI and VCI fields' value.

Because of its predictable size, it eases the network management
and the debugging process chore as the serialisation delay or the delay of
processing cells is deterministic. This is particularly useful in voice and
video traffic since they are time-sensitive (though its advantages has been
chipped away as the wide adoption of [Voice over IP (VoIP)](202303201850.md)).
However, it does add to the network overhead. For example, suppose ATM wants to
transfer 100 bytes of information, it needs to split it up to 3 frames, where 15
bytes of them are allocated to headers instead of being used to carry the
information.

As a connection-based service, ATM requires that the connection must be
requested, established, and confirmed before any operation on sending user
information over the network. Each connection is composed of virtual channels
and virtual paths. Virtual channels, which could take different physical paths
through the network, are bundled into a single logical group: virtual path.
Multiple virtual paths will be bundled into a larger logical grouping called
transmission path.

There are two kinds of circuits primary used by
ATM: [Permanent Virtual Circuit (PVC)](202208301245.md)# and
[Switched Virtual Circuit (SVC)](202208301240.md)# . The latter is quite common
among ATM installation. ATM also utilises the [LAN Emulation (LANE)](202209221816.md)#
technology, which offer user the ability to communicate using
[Local-Area Network (LAN)](202207051554.md) protocols within the ATM network.
