---
tags: [performance, networking]
---

# ATM Available Bit-Rate (ABR)

ATM ABR is an [Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM)](202209221012.md)
[Network-Assisted Congestion Control](202304261755.md) with rate-based approach
in where the sender can explicitly compute the maximum rate at which it can send
and regulate itself accordingly based on CI, NI, and ER parameters. It
guarantees minimum cell transmission rate (MCR) and in-order packet arrival with
congestion indication, but doesn't maintain the packet's timing and the packet
loss may occur during the transmission.

It provides three mechanisms for signalling congestion-related information from
the switches to the receiver, that are **explicit forward congestion indication
(EFCI) bit**, **congestion control (CI) and no increase (NI) bits**, and
**explicit rate (ER) field**.

Congested [Switch](202207051907.md) will set EFCI to 1 in data cell to the
destination, which the destination host must check all the received data cells.
If EFCI is set on the most recently received data cell, the destination will set
the CI bit on the received resource-management (RM) cell and sent the modified
RM cell back to the sender. This method always takes precedence over other
mechanisms.

Another approach the switch could take is by setting NI bit to 1 when there is a
mild congestion or CI bit to it to indicate a severe congestion. When the
destination received such RM cell, it will send the cell back to the sender
intact provided that the above scenario doesn't happen, that is the most recent
data cell doesn't have EFCI bit set.

The 2-byte ER field indicates the minimum supportable rate of switches on the
network path. If the switch is congested, it may lower field's value
accordingly.
