---
tags: [memory, performance]
---

# Compiler Optimisation

Compiler often makes assumptions on the source code in order to
[optimise](202203011139.md) the object code to have a better performance.
Basically, compiler makes the As-If transformation on the source code, meaning
the compiler optimises the code as long as the end result is the same, even if
it is inconsistent comparing to the original source code. For example, if the
source code contains a loop but the end result of a simple if statement is the
same to the resulting of the loop, the compiler will favour if statement over
the loop as the final object code. In short, compiler guarantees that the
program state is eventually consistent. ([^Hald2022])

In #c peculiarly, compiler usually assumes that there is an absence of
undefined behaviour (UB). This means that if there is undefined behaviour in a
statement or function, instead of outputting compilation errors, the compiler
might instead optimise it assuming the statement or the function will never be
called since it contains undefined behaviour. Other than that, uninitialised
variable might get optimised too due to its indeterminate state. Therefore,
Hald ([^Hald2022]) advised to not assume the uninitialised variable has a static
and dependable value.

Other than relying on UB, compiler seeks explicit hint to optimise the code if
the programmer deems such program state is unreachable. This can be done by
compiler-specific provided functions such as Clang's or GCC's
`__builtin__unreachable()` and `assume()` from Visual Studio.

**Note**: Type discrepancies could result in runtime errors due to type
conversion, such as from `int` to `unsigned int`, assumed by compiler for
optimisation.

To avoid compiler from optimising, we can use the keyword
[volatile](202202081526.md), [C and C++ Atomic Operations](202503110313.md),
[Memory Padding](202503110328.md).

[^Hald2022]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w3_e9vZj7D8
