---
tags: [linux, planning, devops]
---

# `at`

`at` is a command to schedule one-time job. See [Cron](202411061138.md) for
persistent maintenance job scheduling or [Anacron](202411061308.md) if frequent
device downtime is expected.

`at` accepts the time format of `HH:MM` in 24-hour (or with AM or PM for 12-hour
format). If the time has already passed, the next day is assumed. Other time
format includes `{month} {day-of-month}`, `{month} {day-of-month} {year}`,
`MMDDYY`, `MM/DD/YY`, `DD.MM.YY`, or `YYYY-MM-DD`.

Two commands, that is, `atq` and `atrm` provide additional services for system
admin. `atq` shows job ID, execution date, execution time, queue (a–z, A–Z), and
username, and `at -l` is the alias to `atq`. If it is run under root privilege,
then it will list all jobs from all users. `atrm` removes the job specified by
the job ID from the command argument, and `at -d` is the alias to `atrm`. It is
possible to delete multiple jobs at the same time. If it is run under root
privilege, then it can delete any jobs from any users.

The queue is defined in a–z and A–Z, with `a` is defined for `at` and `b` is
reserved for [`batch`](202411071634.md). Job with a queue of higher letters will
have higher [Process Niceness](202410041519.md). Job with a queue of capital
letter will be viewed as [`batch`](202411071634.md) job.

Other options can be passed to `at` including `-c` (prints command's job ID),
`-f` (reads source of job from file), `-m` (send mail even if there is no
output), `-q` (specify the queue where the job is going to), and `-v` (show time
to be run).

Like in [Cron](202411061138.md), there can be a file `/etc/at.deny` or
`/etc/at.allow` on controlling accessibility of the command to non-root user. If
neither file exists, such access is depends on the decision made by the
[Linux](202204081225.md) distro.
