---
title: A Smartphone-Enabled IoT System for Vibration and Noise Monitoring of Rail Transit
author: [Meng, Qiuhan and Lu, Pengran and Zhu, Songye]
year: 2023
date: 2024-08-16 15:07
tags: [literature, cloud, rail, uiux, networking]
---

This paper focuses on the feasibility of edge computing IoT system with iPhone
as backbone for ride comfort monitoring. Parameters measured include vibration
and noise.

Railways to be monitored includes eight Hong Kong MRT lines. (pg. 5, Section IV
C)

iPhone contains microelectromechanical system sensors which include
accelerometers, gyroscopes, microphones etc. Its feasibility as a monitoring
device has been proven. (pg. 1-2, Section I) However, smartphones have been lack
behind in terms of integrated sensing, data post-processing, and assessment
functions, in which the authors develop their own application for the
experiment. (pg. 2, Section I) Version used are 8, 11, and 12. (pg. 6, Section
IV C)

Edge computing is used to mitigate transmission latency and to offload
computation pressure of the centralised network. (pg. 1-2, Section I)

The networking technology deployed includes 4G, LTE, and Wi-Fi. iPhone provides
real-time data processing and local data storage, connecting to cloud for
interface, analysis, and further computing. (pg. 2, Figure 1) The authors use
Firebase as cloud service. (pg. 3, Section II B)

Real-time data processing can be realised by processing measured data locally in
iPhone devices (edge) and pushing analysis results to the cloud. (pg. 3, Section II
A)
