---
title: "Justice: What's The Right Thing To Do?"
authors: Michael Sandel
year: 2009
date: 2022-02-23 12:58
tags: [philosophy, literature, moral]
---

# The Moral Side of Murder

Sandel presents two scenarios: first the famous trolley problem and a follow-up
surgery scene.

The trolley problem set up an assumption: you are a driver for a brake-defect
train. From your sight, you know that there are 5 trail workers on the rail, and
you can not stop the train from running into them. But there is another way out:
you could turn the wheel and choose to sacrifice the other trail worker who is
alone and working on a split rail. You could choose either accepting the faith
and run into the five or turning the wheel to kill the one.

In the surgery scene, you are instead a surgery docker that is currently taking
care of 5 patients in the ICU who are in critical condition. These patients need
an organ transplantation in order to survive, imply that their needs does not
overlap. Not long after, there is a new patient sent into the ICU. You could
choose either let the five die or sacrifice the new patient to save them.

Most people choose to save the five.

Then, Sandel tweak the scenarios a little: In the trolley problem, you become a
pedestrian that is passing by on a bridge which is on the track. You know the
train from afar is losing control which will eventually run into the 5 trail
workers. However, there is a fat man who is standing on the bridge. If you push
him over, you could stop the train and save the five.

And in the surgery scene, instead of a newly arrived patient, it is a healthy
person who is going to do a monthly routine check-up. You can retrieve the
organs from the person and transplant the healthy organs into the five.

Most people who previously choose the save the five refuse to do it.

These scenarios lure the two most basic moral reasoning: consequentialist and
categorical.

Consequentialists argue that an action is just if the consequence it brought is
good. Jeremy Bentham, an English philosopher and the father of utilitarianism,
is one of them.

Categoricalists argue instead that an action can be wrong by itself regardless
of its consequences. The most prestigious defender of it is the German
philosopher Emmanuel Kant.

Sandel address the skeptists' arguments, that these kinds of philosophical
debates are meaningless since none of the great philosophers have solved them.
He argues that the reason of why these debates are still ongoing is the fact
that they are part of our life which is unavoidable.

# The Case for Cannibalism

Sandel brought up a case: Regina v. Dudley and Stephens (1884). In this case,
there were four man in a yacht, Thomas Dudley, Edwin Stephens, Edmund Brooks and
an orphan, Richard Parker. A storm destroyed the vessel, all of them barely
escaped by a lifeboat. They brought little foods and fresh water. Later, Parker
was dying after he against the advice from the crews to drink the salt water
from see.

As there were no sign of rescue, Dudley suggested draw a lottery to decide who
to be killed in order for the others to survive. Brooks refused. After several
days pass, there were still no sight of vessels. Dudley and Stephens decided to
kill Parker. Not long after, they had been rescued.

When they are on the coast, both Dudley and Stephens had been brought up to the
court where Brooks as witness.

As the most people do not agree on the act of Dudley and Stephens, Sandel
brought up Jeremy Bentham. Bentham said that human favours pressures over pains,
thereafter we should always maximising the pressure for the most. In this case,
he would argue that since Dudley and Stephens had their family back home whereas
Packer do not, sacrificing him to save the crews is desirable.

In the seat, some argue that in order to justify the murder, the crews need to
have the consent from Packer. Some people will do that if the lottery proceeded.
However, some others completely reject the idea of killing Packer.

## Questions

Sandel rose three questions:
1. Do we have certain fundamental right?
2. Does a fair procedure justify any result?
3. What is the moral work of consent?

My answers to those:
1. Yes, we do have fundamental rights. Like the right to live, the right to
   speak, the right to reproduce etc.
2. I don't think that a fair procedure can justify any result. Such procedure is
   still under the subject of the local cultural bias where they could be wrong.
   For example, a gay person could be hanged by the local jury because he is
   gay. The procedure is fair, and they gather enough evidence to prove that he
   is gay. So is the judgement just? I do not think so.
3. Having a consent is like having a permission. If the thing do upon on him is
   agreed by him, then such act is viewed just by him. However, I do not think
   consent has any moral groundwork. It is merely a
   [202202242036](../202202242036.md).

# Putting a Price Tag on Life

Jeremy Bentham said that we should maximise the utilities or happiness for the
community since we, human like happiness over suffering.

When Sandel brought up two examples: a Czech cigarette company which argue that
smoking is cost-benefit, and Ford which argue that not installing safety
measures is cost-benefit, where they both put price tag onto the human lives,
some argue that those companies does not include the suffering of the victim's
family, emotion or his or her role in the society.

Sandel brought up another example: a psychologist in the 1930s during the Great
Depression conducted an experiment. He wants to prove that it is possible to
evaluate everything into a value. The first most expensive item is to migrate to
Kansas, the second is to eat worm.

# How to Measure Pleasure

Sandel said that Bentham's utilitarianism fails to do three things: respect
individual rights, aggregate all values with a single measurement like dollars
and recognise higher-order pleasure.

We could see its limitation by simply using a Colosseum example. In the Roman
era, it is a common practice to throw people into the Colosseum, naked and
unarmed, to fight with wild animals. This clearly does not respect the
individual right of the person to die humanely. Or from other perspective, we
could say that it overvalues the pleasure of the audience to the life of the
victim.

To improve Benthamite version of utilitarianism, John Stuart Mill, an English
philosopher, argue that it is possible to derive higher-order pleasure from
lower-order pleasure without violate the core principle of utilitarianism. To
differentiate them, one could offer two choices that could produce pleasure to
an educated man. The one he prefers is the higher-order pleasure.

However, Benthamite argues that there is no pleasure that is more valuable or
important to the other. All pleasures are equals. Benthamite says that
utilitarianism should be egalitarian where utilities must be measure in quantity
rather than in quality.

# Free to Choose

Mill argues that individual rights can be protected under utilitarianism. He
said by respecting individual rights, the society will benefit from it in the
long run. However, such explanation has several shortcomings. What if the
violation of individual rights could benefit the society in the long run? Or it
is really because of utilities that such violation is unjust?

Libertarians instead emphasise self-possession or simply the pursuit or
preservation of individual liberties. Everyone has the freedom to choose
whatever they want where no one should ever force them even with reasons.

Libertarians reject some legislations in the government such as paternalist
legislation, moral legislation and redistribution of income from rich to poor.
Paternalist legislation such as requiring motorcycle riders to wear a helmet or
people to wear a mask is not just at all. Legislation that promote certain
morals should not be made too.

Libertarians are staunch defenders of private property. They said that the
possession of wealth is just if two justices met: justice in acquisition and
justice in transfer. Justice in acquisition concerns about how the wealth is
created or got whereas justice in transfer usually refer to free market where
everyone could make their choices without coercion.

Robert Nozick, an American philosopher, went so far that argues taxation is a
form of appropriation of the fruit of labour, which implies that it is a forced
labour which further implies that it is a form of slavery.

# Who Owns Me

Other libertarians could go so far that stealing in order to feed the family in
itself is justifiable since it is a choice being made consciously by oneself.

There are several objections to the libertarian moral principles.

Some argues that the poor need the money more compare to the rich. It will
create more utilities to the society as a whole especially if there is a wide
wealth gap. Libertarians reject the idea that needs could be used to justify the
violation of individual rights such as taxation.

Others, try to break the logic of Nozick state, that taxation by consent of the
governed is not forced. Libertarians response that no procedure should be
appropriated to justify the violation of individual rights even if it is done
democratically.

There are people who think that the successful owed a debt to the society. They
used the resources and utilities provided by the society, and they should redeem
themselves by paying more taxes in order to redistribute the wealth to the poor.
Libertarians argue that the successful has already pay their debt by providing
services to the society.

Some reasons that the creation of wealth depends partly on luck. In such,
redistribute a portion of it to the poor is justified. Libertarians protest by
saying that the possession of the wealth itself is just in regards that it is
earned legally via free market where everyone could choose freely. Plus, they
have already redeemed by provides services to the society.

Other people point out that not all individual rights are the same. For example,
the right to possess private property is not the same with the right of free
speech or the right of practice their own religion. Therefore, there are variety
of degree on what could be call as a violation.

Some went even further that completely rejects the premise made by the
libertarians that one could truly own themselves. They advocate that since
people are live in a society, they have given up some rights in order to join
into the said society.

# This Land is My Land

John Locke believed that some fundamental human rights such as property right,
life and liberty cannot be violated by any organisation including the
government. Those rights are granted in the law of nature way before there is
any government exists. They are called natural rights.

Natural rights are unalienable which means that nobody including oneself could
not deny or appropriate other's or oneself enjoyment of the rights under the law
of nature. Because of this characteristic, Locke argue that those rights are
truly own by the individual.

To justify private property, Locke said that everyone has a property right on
themselves. Therefore, the fruit of labour they produce or an unowned object
mixed with their labour could be rightfully claimed by them as long as they left
enough to the others that have not do so.

However, such logic could be used to justify the aggression of Europeans towards
the aboriginal Americans during the American colonisation. Furthermore, how
could this apply to today's capitalist system? Can the labourer hired by a
capitalist owned the fruit of labour that they produce? A capitalist does not
necessary laid claim on a machinery by working on it rather they buy it with
cash. Is such claim valid?

On government, Locke said that it is limited in a way that it only defines what
counts as property, what counts as respecting of life and liberty.

# Consenting Adults

Locke argues that the consent is used to eliminate inconveniences from law of
nature. In the state of nature, everyone could be their own judge to define what
counts as a violation of natural rights. They can rightfully kill anyone that
does not respect their right in the state of nature. However, this burden is
certainly too much to carry. Therefore, individuals agree to construct a
government where it executes its legislation to protect those natural rights.

With consent, i.e. majority consent, a government could rightfully tax or pass a
conscription law in order to maintain a functional government. However, such
laws can not target on a certain individual or a group of people. It cannot be
arbitrary, it must be a general one.

If one used a service that is provided by the government, we imply that we give
our consent to the government legitimacy. Such consent is call implied consent.

# Hired Guns

Locke said that the consent of individual to a specific military order or
taxation does not matter in a society. The consent that should be considered is
the consent to be governed and bound by the majority. The legislation passed by
the government is just as long as the law does not aim at certain individual or
a group of people according to the moral principle held by Lockist. This means
that the government is only bound by the **rule of law**.

There are essentially three types of drafting: all-volunteer, conscription and
mercenaries. Most people favour all-volunteer, then conscription. Least people
favour mercenaries.

Sandel mentioned that there was a war substitute system during Civil War. The
system works like this: there will be a lottery on who will be going to serve in
the army. If the man refused to serve, he can pass such chance to others if he
could find his replacement and pay to him.

There are some objection to it. First, some argues that it is the same as
valuing life with dollars. However, according to the supporters of this system,
as the man agree to be pay to such value, it implies that his life is valued
that much.

Some objectors notice the disproportionate representation in the army. They
argue that in a society where income inequality is significant, whether it is a
war substitute system or the so called all-volunteer system, such draft is
targeting a specific group of people. The rich could exempt themselves from
being recruited whereas from the poor's perspective, it is a kind of coercion.
Therefore, such drafting system is unjust.

Some tries to defend all-volunteer system that it is different from war
substitute system. Patriotism, they said, is the core of all-volunteer system.
The soldier is better not because they are paid, in contrary it is the love to
the country that makes them better. However, such argument, if we think
thoroughly, does not legitimise all-volunteer system. In fact, it argues against
it and favours a conscription system. Further, it is not necessary that a good
soldier is the one that loves their country, the supporters of mercenaries army
argue that mercenaries are, too, good soldier that fight well.

# Motherhood: For Sale

Sandel brought up a famous case in New Jersey, Baby M.

In this case, Mary Beth Whiteheads entered a surrogacy contract with William
Stern in order to give birth to Stern family which his wife could not due to
medical reasons. Whiteheads artificially inseminated Stern's sperm which she
agreed to give up her parental rights on the child with a compensation of
$10,000 follows by up-keep expenses. After gave birth to a daughter from Stern,
Whiteheads refused the child to be taken away from her.

When Sandel asked his students which side do they stand with, most people chose
Stern's. Their reason is that a contract is a form of consent. Once you have
entered such consent, the terms of the contract will be effective to both
parties, and it should be enforced.

That being said, having a consent does not mean it is justifiable. A consent
could be tainted or flawed if it is a coercion or lacks information. In Baby M,
the objectors to Stern's is that Whiteheads, the mother for the baby, did not
have the full information about the terms that she was going to enter. She did
not and impossible to know how deep the bond will be with her future daughter.

Some even argues that surrogacy in itself is dehumanising, it is comparable to
baby selling. Elizabeth Anderson, an American philosopher, explained that it is
dehumanising since such activities alienate the woman's labour by repressing her
love to the child that she gave born to which is promoted by social norms.
Essentially, this means that certain goods should not open to use even with
compensation.

## Additional Thoughts

1. Why adoption should be legal?

Adoption is a different situation compare to surrogacy. The mother decided to
abandoned her child after realising that she does not want to raise her child.
Whether it is moral or not, the mother has given up her right to her child after
the birth. She, by now, fully aware of her decision and has clear information in
addition. Adopting such child is to protect the child's basic human rights for
they to strive in a healthy environment. Therefore, adoption should be legal.

With surrogacy, the mother does not have the whole image of how she will feel
about the child. Therefore, even though the contract stated that she needs to
give up her child in order to honour it, she still has every right to regret it
since such contract is flaw in its core.

2. Why surrogacy is dehumanising whereas adoption is not?

Surrogacy involves the systemic process of taking away the child from women's
womb and actively suppresses the feeling of the mother to her child. Therefore,
it is comparable to baby selling. Adoption is different from surrogacy in a
sense that it does not involve in taking the child away from the women's womb.

## Questions

1. How free does the voluntary exchange have to be with respect to bargaining
   power and equal information?
2. Is utilities the only way of treating goods? If not, then what modes of
   valuation are fitting to such goods?

My answers:

1. The voluntary exchange can be as free as possible as far as it does not
   violate the basic human rights.
2. Utilities are not the only way of treating goods. There are some value that
   even ourselves cannot give up and should not force others to give up.

# Mind Your Motive

Immanuel Kant said that human as a rational and autonomous being should not be
used merely as a mean but also at the same time as an end in themselves.

There are two premises that we need to explain here: What is a rational being?
What is an autonomous being?

A rational being is a being that is able to reason. An autonomous being is a
being that is able to free to decide what to choose.

What could count as free to decide what to choose by Kantian? Is avoiding pain
in order to pursue pleasure an act that depict the freedom to choose? Is the
ability to choose an apple today and an orange tomorrow the freedom to choose?
Kant said such pursue of pleasure and appetite is obeying to our inclination,
which is not free. This is heteronomy, where we act according to our desires
which is not chosen by ourselves. Kantian thinks that freedom is the opposite of
necessity. To be free, we need to act according to the law that I have given to
myself.

A good act is good by itself. How? We could measure its motive, the quality of
will and intentions. If the act is carried out in the sake of carrying it out,
that is out of the sense of duty, a reverence of the moral law where we see the
importance of the moral law, then such act is moral. Otherwise, it is not moral
even if it brings good consequences. An act is wrong when the actor does it for
their self-interests. This is why, Kant argues, utilitarianism is wrong.
Utilitarianism uses human as an instrument in order to bring out a good end. It
is using human as merely as a mean. It does not respect human dignity.

Then how could we isolate operative motive behind a moral act? We could study it
in the worst case. For example, in the case of suicide, we could imagine a
miserable man and think why he does not take his own life. It is because there
is a duty of preserving one self.

There is another doubt on Kantian moral principle. How then could we tell that
such moral law, coming out from individuals will be objective? How does it not
fell under [202202242036](../202202242036.md)? This is because humans share the
universal capacity of reason among themselves undifferentiated regardless of
contingent and empirical ends. This means that there is no difference in
exercising that capability of reason among humans. All reasonable humans will
come out with the one and same moral law.

# The Supreme Principle of Morality

Having a feeling or sentiments on an act is fine as long as the intentions of an
act is aligned to the moral law that you imposed on yourself. It is not wrong to
have feelings to support your action.

There are three contrast in presented in the shaping of Kantian moral principle:
duty vs. inclination, autonomous vs. heteronomous and categorical vs.
hypothetical. Each of them represent the motives, determination of will and
imperative respectively. These elements shape the three pillars of the Kantian
moral principle: the morality, freedom and reason.

A hypothetical imperative is a mean-end reasoning. It justifies the use of a
mean by the end. Utilitarianism is one of those such reasoning. From Kant
perspective, such imperative is not moral.

Kant argued for a categorical imperative for moral principle. Sandel gave two of
three formulation of such imperative: The formula of universal law and the
formula of humanity as an end.

In the formula of universal law, think about this: If a maxim (a principle) is
active in a society, will it in the end undermine itself? If no, then such maxim
is aligned with the categorical imperative. If yes, then such maxim is certainly
immoral. Some, like John Stuart Mill, might argues that such testing is
contractionary since it use consequentialist reasoning. In fact, this test is
just used to figure out whether you act according to your own needs which
implies that you are more important than the others. It is not exactly the
reason behind on why you should act like such.

From the formula of humanity as an end, Kant stated that humans are end in
themselves, they have dignity since they are rational and autonomous beings.
Therefore, human is not open for use merely as a mean. If an act must use human
as a mean, it must first respect humanity, where it also uses human as an end.

## What is being left out

The third formula for categorical imperative is the formula of autonomy. The
subject must carry out the execution of the moral law by their own wills. They
must be self-legislated. If a man cannot act according to oneself law, then his
act cannot be considered as moral. He needs to do the right thing, which such
act is universally justifiable and does not use humanity as an end, for the sake
of carrying out in order to respect the moral law that he set for himself.

# A Lesson in Lying

Duty is compatible to autonomous, Kant argued, in the sense that pure reason
guided our will to make our own choice to adhere and honour to the moral law
which we come out with.

As the object of the experience, we are subjected to the law of nature and
inclination. As the subject of the experience, however, we have the autonomy to
make our own choice. Such gap or contrast, is what make morality impossible to
be delivered by science itself.

There was a French philosopher named Benjamin Constant bring up a lying case in
order to ridicule Kant's philosophy: There is a murderer that seek to kill your
friend where he is now hided in your home. Should you sell out your friend in
order to honour the moral laws that you have chosen? Kant's answer is to say no.
No matter what kind of situation you are in, it is categorical wrong to lie even
wishing for a good consequence (*see the three formula of categorical
imperative*).

That being said, Kant did not oppose telling a misleading truth. There is a
difference between a misleading truth and a blatant lie. Sandel then brought up
the Watergate scandal, where USA president Bill Clinton was telling to the media
that he "does not have any sexual relationship with the woman". Some in the seat
argues that misleading is still not moral because the motives behind such act is
to hope that nobody could catch on it. Kant would believe, Sandel suggested,
that Bill Clinton is moral, in the sense that he does not tell a lie, instead
evades the question but at the same time honours the moral law that he imposed
on himself.

# A Deal is a Deal

Kant stated that justice comes from a hypothetical social contract, which is an
idea of reason. John Rawls, an American philosopher, further supported this in
his book Theory of Justice said that first, justice is not a subject to
political bargaining or social interests and second, the contract itself is
hypothetical where he introduces the concept of *veil of ignorance*, which
eliminates the inequality of bargaining power, knowledge and situational
difficulties.

This means that actual contract itself does not necessarily morally
self-sufficient, meaning it cannot justify itself. For example, a nation's
constitution or its legal laws does not represent the justice. Rather, it merely
reflects the differences of bargaining power between different individuals in
the parliament or community.

Let us say that you have signed up a contract with a worker to give you 100
apples for $100. After receiving the apples, you refuse to pay the worker. Such
act is immoral in the sense that you already received the benefits from the
worker but you decided not to pay his fruit of labour. This violates the
*reciprocity* nature of the contract, that is it should mutually benefit both
parties!

Now look at another case. The same contract that you signed up with the worker
but in this case you regret it after one minute. The worker has yet give you any
apples. There is no violation on the *reciprocity* nature of the contract.
However, this still considered as immoral because as an autonomous being, we are
able to come up with a contract to bind not only other people but also our own
self. Violating the contract that we have come up using our reason is the same
as violating the moral law that we imposed to own self.

The above cases illustrate two kinds of contract: consent-based contract and
benefit-based contract. The underlying moral principle of consent-based contract
is that we are autonomous being that could impose the moral law, which we have
came up using our reason, to ourselves. We could see that this moral principle
is a Kantian idea. In benefit-based contract, the moral principle works around
the reciprocity, that is the mutual benefit, of signed parties. If one already
provides a benefit to the other, there is an obligation to the received to pay
back the favour or benefit.

David Hume, a Scottish philosopher, totally rejected the second kind of
contract, which implies that contract could work totally alone with reciprocity.
There is a case where a painter painted his house without asking Hume to do it.
The painter argues that he already painted Hume's house so it is sensible to ask
for a pay after that, even though he admitted that he did not ask the consent
from Hume himself first. Hume then ridiculed this logic by stating the painter
could just paint all the houses in Edinburg without asking the consent from the
owner and later ask for a payment. He thought active consent is necessary in
making a contract.

Some in the seats even argues that benefit itself is subjected to
interpretation. One considers as benefit does not necessary mean the same to the
other.

# What's a Fair Start & What Do We Deserve

To enter the veil of ignorance is to enter the origin of equality where nobody
has any assigned identity to oneself. Rawls argued, from here, people will
decide two universal principles for a just society. These principles are the
respect of the fundamental human rights such as freedom of expression, freedom
of religion and freedom of movement, and *difference principle*.

What is difference principle? It is a principle proposed by Rawls, which stated
that social and economic inequalities is permitted or tolerated as long as it
works to the benefit of the least well off. This means that there is no wrong in
differences of income and wealth (or any differences) if these differences will
bring utilities to the least fortune. Based on this, Rawls supported the idea to
tax the rich and distribute them to the poor in order to cover the cost of
training and empowerment of them.

The reason people choose over to reverence the fundamental rights for human is
that they don't fathom the idea that the majority could oppress them once they
have entered such society. Rawls stated that this is why utilitarianism is
unfavourable.

As to difference principle, Rawls justified it by saying the distribution of
resources should not be influenced by the factor that is arbitrary from the
moral point of view. If one couldn't claim credit from that circumstances, then
the benefit that they get from that circumstances can't be justified, and it is
fine to take that benefit from that person and give it to the others that are
less fortune than them. We could see that family background, education, talents,
and even birth order could shape one's ethics, world view and working culture.
Therefore, Rawls claimed, the efforts that produced from a person doesn't
necessarily come from themselves. They are baked from arbitrary factors. For
example, a strong person could perform better than a weak person in construction
work. This doesn't mean that the strong person is work harder than their weak
counterpart.

Rawls strongly objected meritocracy. He stated that while meritocracy is an
improvement to aristocracy and libertarian free market, it ignores that everyone
in the society has different starting point. Even if meritocracy could eliminate
all the social and economic differences, there is still the natural distribution
of abilities and talents. By such, he said that the difference principle is a
good replacement to the meritocracy, where the inequalities are allowed as long
as it benefits the least fit or well off.

Milton Friedman, an American libertarian economist, opposed Rawls idea, by
saying it would be a disaster to trying to control the outcome of a system. He
said that inequalities are inevitable, and there is no point on limiting them.
Rawls repelled such argument, stated that born unequal is neither just nor
unjust since it is naturally decided which is not voluntarily chosen by
individual themselves. It's the way on how to deal with it the discussion of
justice.

Libertarians whose hold the value that everyone has self-possession challenged
Rawls that using methods like taxing for any purpose without the will or consent
from the individual violate the self-possession. In addition, without
recognising talents and endowment as owned by ourselves, we will regress to use
other people as a mean since it is the only way where a functional society could
be established. Rawls responded by saying that we don't actually own ourselves.
He elaborated further that by following this two principle came out from the
veil of ignorance, we don't need self-possession to uphold moral principles.

Some said that reluctant of accepting efforts could be awarded will destroy the
incentives for the individual to strive. Based on this argument, Rawls said that
meritocracy is the same. It doesn't reward the efforts, it rewards the
contribution to the society. Go back to the example of construction workers.
Weak construction worker has the same or even more efforts compare to their
strong counterpart. But meritocracy does not reward the weak one, it rewards the
strong construction worker because they have better labour performance. Isn't
this killing the incentives of the weak worker? Furthermore, society doesn't
recognise all talents. One talent may weight more than the others. This emanates
a different outcome from the same efforts which is unequal. Reward someone based
on this inequality is unjust.

Rawls argued distributive justice is not a matter of moral desert but rather a
matter of entitlement. Human's legitimate expectations found upon social
institutions must be satisfied in a justice scheme. However, such expectations
or entitlements does not necessarily reflect their intrinsic value. The
distinction between moral desert and entitlement could be seen in the difference
of a pure luck game and a pure skill game. In a pure luck game, if one win the
lottery, they are entitled to be awarded. In contrast, if one win in a pure
skill game, there is always the question on whether they morally deserve that
prize.

# Arguing Affirmative Action

In the case of Hopwood vs. Texas, Cheryl Hopwood sued Texas Law School for
rejecting her application due to affirmative action policy (to include minority
groups) despite having a better grade.

There are three main arguments to support Texas position: corrective,
compensatory, and diversity. Corrective argument points out that current
education system for white and minority is not equal. They receive uneven
funding which resulted in a quality discrepancy of the education system.
Compensatory argument turns to the history side. It reasons that there is a need
for compensating the wrong doing of the past, in this case the mistreatment of
the black such as slavery and racial segregation. And then, there is an
avocation for diversity, argues the social mission of the university is to bring
different education experience into the seats and utilise them for the good of
the society.

However, there are some objections to these arguments. Argue against the
compensatory argument, some said that it is not fair for Cheryl to sacrifice her
academic career for something that she doesn't implicated or participated in.
Second, others also concerns about that such policy is based on arbitrary
factors such as racial identity.

Here's my counter arguments to those objections. Firstly, even if she doesn't
involved in the tragic of the historical event, such event has a drastic effect
on the minority which there's no way to redeem them other than retract the
benefits that Cheryl enjoyed. Furthermore, she does benefitted from the
suffering of the minority albeit that was long time ago as today's white enjoy a
greater prosperity compare to the minority. Now, coming to the other objection.
If arbitrary factors shouldn't be considered, then one should object the Harvard
legacy admission where if the parents is an alumni of the school, then their
children can have a greater chance on getting into the university. Additionally,
talents are by no mean just a result of striving. The saying that arbitrary
factors should not be valued doesn't understand the nature of talents, skills,
family backgrounds and other environmental factors.

# What's the Purpose?

The advantage of having diversity within the social institution especially in
university is to let different group people contribute their variety of
educational experience to the society. Different backgrounds such as being a
farmer's son, black or bisexual can enhance or fill in the education experience
where other backgrounds like a billionaire's beneficiary, white or heterosexual
could not bring.

As mentioned, Rawls doesn't agree that moral desert should be satisfied within
the distributive justice framework. Just because you have a better metrics,
doesn't necessary mean that you deserve something compare to the others.
Therefore, Rawls will argue that Hopwood doesn't have the right to be admitted.
There is no violation of individual right, as this is not the survival necessity
for a human.

Moreover, the affirmative action policy doesn't contain any malice or implying
that one race is inferior to the others unlike other exclusion policy based on
racial or religion identity. It is based on the demographics instead of
malicious beliefs.

That being said, Sandel raised the question: Should private institutions define
their own mission whatever they want? I argue that this shall not be the case.
Even they are privately owned by some individuals, they are still bind to the
norm of the society as they have a significant effect and responsibility on
shaping the society. What if the private institutions intended to spread a
malicious ideas? They will convert some members of the society to their banner
and advocate them in public political theatre. As such, it is not wise to just
let private institutions minding their own business and pretend that they don't
have an effect on public affairs.

Up until now, we are only talking about modern philosophers. You will notice
there is a theme on them: Almost all of them think that justice should not be a
award to a certain kind of virtue or moral desert. Sandel argued that this is
what differ modern philosophy and ancient philosophy, as the latter focuses more
on justice based on virtue.

The most famous ancient moral reasoning is teleological reasoning which evolves
around the point, the end or the goal of a thing (Telos). Its prominent
advocator, Aristotle, stated that the persons who are equal should have equal
things assigned to them. It goes like this: Who should the best flute to be
belong to? Aristotle would reason the best flute player shall have the best
flute. Sure, from utilitarianism point of view, this means that it can be used
to produce music of great quality which in turn benefits the society as a whole.
He would agree on this point, however, only treat them as as side effect. The
main reason why should the best flute player to own the best flute, is because
that's what the flute is for. Flute is designed to produce a good music,
therefore if someone can utilise this purpose to the maximum, then they are
deserved to have the flute assigned to them.

Some will said that such discrimination is unjust. As a response, Aristotle
argued that maybe discrimination is inevitable. Therefore, we should focus on
which kind of discrimination should be considered as just. He claimed that the
discrimination be according to the relevant excellence, according to the virtue,
is just.

# The Good Citizen

Aristotle argued that the reason about justice is the reason about the telos of
social justice institutions. To know the telos of social justice institutions,
we need to know the telos of politics. The purpose or telos of politics, is to
form a good character, to cultivate virtue. The law implemented should not be
merely an enforcement, but a way of life for the polis (city state). Without
politics, one could not simply acquire virtue by just reading theory.

Why politics has such importance in virtue acquisition? Aristotle answered that
human being can only fully realise the nature as human being through political
participation. The reason? Because only through political participation or
deliberation, one can exercise their human capacity, that is to decide which is
right or wrong, which is just or unjust. Human are not by nature
self-sufficient, Aristotle argued, as the polis or political community exists
prior individual in terms of purpose. And only by living together with other
human and participate in politics, the acquisition of the virtue can become
possible.

Only through practices, we then can acquire the virtue. Like any other
activities such as drawing, wood crafting, badminton etc., virtue can't simply
be learnt just by reading someone's works and/or minding their own business. It
is essential to know how others play or work, and practise for it to become good
at it in music. Similarly, virtue can only be obtained by exercising it in a
public institution.

In Aristotle opinion, the thing that is at stake in the justice or morality
discussion is the excellence that should be honoured. What kind of excellence
should we reward? This can be answered by inspecting the telos of the activity
or thing. If one has such excellency, they should have greater right or say in
that field. For instance, if a representative in an assembly has the best civil
excellence compare to others, they should have the greatest civil authority over
the discussed matters.

# Freedom Vs. Fit

From Aristotle's point of view, justice is about fitting a virtue or excellency
into a desired role. Justice is to fulfil the telos of the activity in the
discussion. And debating the telos of the activity, Aristotle argued, ultimately
lead to which honour is at stake.

Rawls rejected the teleological moral reasoning all together, insisted that such
reasoning threatens the very existing modern political framework avocates for
equal rights. Additionally, modern philosophers tend to avoid such way of
reasoning, as it is impratical to reach to a consensus on what's the purpose of
an activity in a plural society. Instead, they pushes for a framework for which
people could choose their way of life without violating other's fundamental
rights, and free from any role, tradition or convention that being expected or
forced by parents or society.

It could be seen in the case *PGA Tour, Inc. v. Martin*. Casey Martin is a
professional golf player who unfortunately has an undermined ability to walk due
to his circulatory condition. In order to play without hurting or risking his
health, he requested to PGA Tour, the organiser of the main professional golf
tours played by men in US and North America, allowing him to use a golf cart.
However, his demand was rejected by PGA Tour.

In the court, PGA Tour attorney argued that walking the course is an essential
part of the golf, for that it makes golf playing as a sport, not merely as a
skill game. Giving a golf cart to a player is like giving a flipper to a swimmer
who is compete in a swimming competition. Even if the swimmer has disability, it
violates the purpose, or telos, of the game, and diminished the athletic aspect
of it.

The points have some oppositions. One could raise the question about how
athletic the golf could be. In the end, the goal of the game, is to push the
ball, which is static, into the goal hole. Compare to other ball sports such as
football, basketball and badminton, it doesn't burn that much calories or
require athletic strength and/or stamina. After all, the player can be out of
shape while still being able to store high in the competition. (This does fit
the narrative of Aristotle, as the distribution of a thing ultimately resulted
in questioning the telos of an activity. However, this is the exact reason of
why modern philosophers say that teleological moral reasoning is ineffective in
a plural society.)

Aristotle's justification on Greek #slavery is rather dubious and ill-logical,
which might discredit him and his moral reasoning for modern thinkers. He stated
that for slavery to be justified, one must prove it to be necessary and there is
one to fit the system. He argued that for citizenship to be effective, that is
for people to participate in the politics of their polis and join the discussion
in the assembly, they need to be free from daily chores. Slavery comes into the
place. The slaves will support the citizens, and help them by doing all the
miniature labour for them. Therefore, slavery is necessary for the citizenship
system. Second, Aristotle claimed that there are people that fit the role of
slave. It is natural to have people that is meant to be ruled over.

Although Aristotle, as one of the prominent figure in teleological reasoning,
were trying to justified such brutal system, it doesn't mean that teleological
reasoning can't work against his reasoning. One would argue, that not every
enslaved people are naturally fit to the system. Most of them were obtained via
wars at the time. If coersion exists, it means that they were unfit the role as
slaves. Some go even further by attesting the fact that fitting a particular
role doesn't mean a person is willing to be in such a role.

# The Claims of Community

Kant objected Aristotle's stand of points of the legislating laws to strictly
promote or enforce one particular conception of good life. Instead, he argued
that we should pursue a fair framework in which everyone can pursue their own
conception of good life, thus doesn't violate one own freedom. In short, a free
moral man shouldn't bound by the moral ties that is not chosen by them.

However, communitarians like Alasdair MacIntyre didn't agree that there is no
obligation for oneself to their community. Instead, they opted for a narrative
conception of self as they view that human is essentially a story-telling
creature, that is what stories I find myself a part. This question should be
answered before the question of what am I to do. In other words, community
values such as solidarity come before individual choices. The community stories
such as history memories, parents, clan etc. is where we draw our identity,
which is our moral starting point. Cutting the ties (withdrawing our membership
of the community) from the past of our community will result in deforming our
present relationships. By this, communitarians argued that other than the two
moral obligations advocated by libertarians like natural duties (universal
duties) and voluntary obligation (contract, consent), there is a third moral
obligation, that is narrative obligation.

One may ask that what to do when there are conflicting obligations in different
communities. The answer from the communitarians is by choosing the most
universal perspective and compare them in that framework. But we can argue that
such choice is arbitrary and there is no way to restrict that people can't
choose a more specific perspective.

In the question of patriotism, there are some argues citizenship itself is a
construct, thus there is no mandatory obligation of one to the country where
they were born. Though there might be some emotion ties to said country, such
sentimental feelings bring no moral obligation. Whether one has an obligation to
a community, is determined by how many benefits one have received from the
community.

# Where Our Loyalty Lies

Sandel stated that there are four main objection to the communitarians. First,
the concern of overlapping obligations from multiple communities that are
conflicting to each other and the fact there is no guide on which community
should come first as seem from the debate that most people chose the most
specific one. Second, the appeal to the sentiment, i.e., the emotion ties of
communities, isn't necessarily the true moral obligations. Third, objection to
the fact that obligation of solidarity and membership is beyond consent. In
fact, the libertarians argued that patriotism can be based on reciprocity
(mutual benefits) and implicit or explicit consent by voluntarily serving the
country, thus forfeit the need of narrative obligation to complement the
voluntary obligation. In other words, there is no intrinsic moral obligation of
being a citizen. The last objection to the communitarians is that the obligation
of membership is ultimately a collective selfishness which is a deviation of
finding a way of good life.

Michael Walzer, a critic of communitarians, argued that if such moral view is to
be accepted, justice itself can't be independent of the community, and instead
is just a matter of faith to the shared understanding among the members.

# Debating Same-Sex Marriage

# The Good Life

