---
title: Ten Days That Shook the World
authors: John Reed
year: 1919
date: 2024-07-01 17:49
tags: [literature, history, socialism]
---

Ten Days That Shook the World records John Reed's eyewitnesses and his
experience of the October Revolution. As a socialist journalist, his method of
documenting such dramatic event in the human history is revolutionary and
insightful on the subject.

## February Revolution and Its Material Condition

Reed pointed out that before the total defeat of the Imperial Russian Army in
1917, it has been disorganised since 1915, due to Tsar's Court appeasement
tendency, lack of arms which resulted in the Great Retreat in 1915, lack of food
in major cities (felling ration of bread and sugar), and manufacture plant's and
transportation's breakdown in 1916. These factors contribute to the happening of
bourgeois February Revolution, in which the Provisional Government replaced the
Imperial Crown as a political entity. Reed distinguishes political and social
revolution, where the former focuses on the replacement of political
institution, and the latter focuses on the improvement on social condition of
the people. The clear implication here is that February Revolution is a limited
political revolution.

He argues against the doubt on the lack of consciousness of the Russian
proletariats due to the huge membership, of 12 million, of the Russia consumer
cooperative societies, which are dominated by moderate socialists, Mensheviks
and Social Revolutionaries (SR), and the rise of the factory-shop committees
which are control by autonomous workers. Another evidence to this is the rising
need of political literature for the public especially for the working people.
The term *oborontsi* is referred to the socialists that support WWI
continuation, especially those from Mensheviks and Right SR.

Reed records that although wages had been improved 500%, it was simply due to
the ruble depreciation. The prices of food and necessities had skyrocketed to
556% and 1,109% respectively. Other political reforms had also faced significant
setbacks including non-complete Army Committee reform (harsh treatment from
officer), jailed Land Committees for implementing government regulation,
black-listing and lockouts on wage labourer. Political exiles are often not
accepted to return to their homeland. Worsen economic conditions increases the
economic crime rate especially those of robberies and housebreaking, resulting
in all-night armed guard in resident apartments.

There was a fear on another postponement on the November Constitute Assembly
Election and opted for proceeding to Soviet Election, aka All-Russian Congress.
Due to major electoral defeats of Mensheviks and SR in the urban areas, earlier
Soviet election, before November Constitute Assembly, faced opposition from
major committees, and instead advocated for its postponement. Provisional
Government was also actively suppressing radical propaganda efforts from
revolutionary elements. In Peasant's Soviets, however, they were more
conservative to the revolutionary ideas due to their slow development of
consciousness and generation of agitation from SR. Reed had observed the rising
schism within SR with more prominent left SR tendencies.

Reed had noticed the rising reactions to the current political institution and
revolutionary fervour, accompany by increasing support from the bourgeois for
foreign intervention to crush a potential socialist-dominated assembly. With the
rise of Bolsheviks that swung Russian politics to further left, bourgeois and
reactionaries were coming together to initiate several noncooperation movements
to discredit February Revolution.

## The Establishment of Provisional Government

In September, Kornilov attempted to coup the Kerensky Government, but failed to
do so as he was arrested by the Soldiers' Committees before any damage has been
done. Reed claimed that Kerensky had some responsibility for the coup, as he
implied that Kerensky had the foresight and information about Kornilov
intention. Note that Bolsheviks position was still pretty weak before the
shenanigans. After the coup attempt, the February Government entered the crisis
mode, as Savinkov, the incumbent Deputy War Minister, refused summoned by the
Central Committee of SR, and as a result, he was expelled from the membership of
SR.

With the collapse of February Government, Kerensky tried to form a coalition
government with the Cadets (Constitutional Democratic Party). However, he faced
with significant backlash from his party (SR) and popular demand, and eventually
back down and establish instead a temporary Directorate of Five Old Ministers.

All-Russian Democratic Conference was called, with three faction formed:
Bolsheviks, Centre-Left (centre and left SR with centre Mensheviks and
Mensheviks Internationalists), and the Right. Bolsheviks demanded that
All-Russian Congress of Soviets to be summoned. The Centre-Left opted instead
for a pure Socialist Government without Cadets' components. The Right supports
Kerensky's solution.

The initial representative list for the Conference was revised to include more
cooperative societies (reminded that they are dominated by moderate socialists)
and conservative bodies (like Zemstovs' and municipalities' representatives).
Despite that, the first vote was passed in the Conference to form a Socialist
Government. However, due to the fear of rising Bolsheviks political powers as
they had won majorities in several major cities (Petrograd, Moscow, Kiev, Odessa
etc.) and the threat of Kerensky to resign, the Conference was instead voted for
a coalition government. The new government then establish the Provisional
Council that is consultative but hold no legislative power, with bourgeois great
influence over the Ministry and the Council as Reed claimed. Not long after, the
broadcast body of All-Russian Central Executive Committee (Tsay-ee-kah),
Izvestia hinted at the dissolution of the Soviets, accompany by the announcement
from the government to liquidate "irresponsible organisation" aiming at the
Soviets. Bolsheviks withdraw from Provisional Council, and on 2 November,
summoned All-Russian Soviets to meet at Petrograd. In the meantime, Cadets in
the Council was attempted to destroy Soldiers and Sailors' Committees, denounced
the Soviets, and delegitimised Russian Republic. Mensheviks Internationalists
and Left SR remained in the Council to advocate Bolshevik slogans for immediate
peace, land distribution, and worker ownership on the factories, which further
widen the crack within the Council as the war further progress. Populist
Socialist in the Council opposed any wartime social and economic reforms.

## The Struggles Between The Soviets and the Council

The power struggles between the soviets and the council can be seen in the peace
efforts for the end of World War I made by both sides. The peace talk between
Russia and the Central Power had been stalled since May 1917. Provisional
Council suggested reactionary General Alexeyex and Foreign Minister Terestchenko
as the envoys to the peace conference, while the Soviets elected Skobeliev,
previously the Minister of Labour, as their representative and declared their
own *nakaz* (instruction) that demanded no annexation, no indemnity, and the
right of self-determination aided by a newly established League of Nation
advocated by US president Woodrow Wilson. However, the Entente protested the
present of Skoveliev as one of the envoys despite rising discontent among
soldiers that demand immediate peace. Reed claimed that the peace negotiation
between Entente and Central Power in Bern, Switzerland, had considered selling
off Russian lands as one of their bargain.

**Note**: There were oversea Russian troops to aid French war efforts. Though
one of them refused going to Salonika, Greece and got brutally suppressed by
their officers.

There were large front desertion, peasant's riots in Tambov and Tver, and
strikes in Moscow, Odessa, and Don's coal mines. Making things worse, Cossack
regiments lead by Kaledin became increasing disobedient to Government's command
despite their leader complicity in Kornilov plot, and later Kaledin's charges
were dropped in exchange for their use as oppressive apparatus. They had become
hostile to Cossack's Soviets and highly autonomous around the area of Kuban.
Growing nationalist tendencies were observed in Ukraine, Finland, Poland, and
Belarus. Ukraine Premier Vinnitchenko even hinted of a separate peace with the
Central Power. Siberia and Caucasus demanded increase autonomy by establishing
their own Constitute Assemblies. Tashkent (now in Uzbekistan) local government
suppressed local Soviets. Petrograd Economic Council was dissolved due to the
intense power struggle and deadlock between capital and labour. Military refused
the reform to establish a voluntary, democratic discipline, and committee-based
army, instead opted for harsh measures.

Bourgeois presses like Brutzev's Obshtchee Dielo (Common Cause) openly defended
Kornilov actions, called for a lead from a strong man, and advocated the
extermination of February democracy. During the unpopular attempt to evacuate
from Petrograd upon the engagement of German naval regiments in the Gulf of
Riga, Cadet cheered for the decision made in the hope that will undermine
revolutionary organisations. The evacuation plan was ultimately scrapped.

The Government and moderate socialists (including SR), supported by the Central
Army and Fleet Committees, some trade unions, and Peasant's Soviets, utilised
presses to oppose the summoning of the All-Russian Congress. There were
instructions to local Soviet committees to delay the Congress on the ground of
nearing date of election of the Constituent Assembly. Reacting to the
obstruction, local Soviets, factory-shop committees, and local army and fleet
organisations either elected their own delegates or form new committees. This
was accompanied by the expanding Bolshevik press organ with the establishment of
the paper Derevenskaya Byednota (Village Poorest) and Rabotchi i Soldat.
