---
title: Building la Grande Armée
authors: A Time of Eagles
year: 2024
date: 2025-03-28 12:12
tags: [literature, military, history]
---

# Infantry and Their Tactics

The presenter rejects the simplistic view of French army during Revolutionary
period to be only capable of performing column tactic. Thus, concluding that
French army can only win through shear brute force.

"The ascendency of the firearm continued until, at the beginning of the
eighteenth century, the combination of a sufficiently reliable musket with a
fixed or fixable bayonet — bayonets having been introduced into the British
service in 1672 — finally eliminated the pike as a separate weapon." (Hughes,
Firepower, p. 11)

Before *flintlock*, firearms were slow to fire and unreliable. They are unable
to do shock actions and vulnerable to enemy's shock actions, especially coming
from calvary. This is the reason pike and shock formation was prevalent during
late 16th and 17th centuries. As the effectiveness of firearms was improved and
after the invention of *plug bayonet* and later *socket bayonet*, pike was made
redundant.

In French, the amount of deployed French pikemen was first halved, then reduced
to 1/3 proportional to the army size in 1651, to 1/4 in 1677, to 1/5 in 1688.
Pikemen were finally dismissed in 1703. (Quimby, The Background of Napoleonic
Warfare, pg 8-9)

The advancement of firearms leads to two developments according to Quimby:
1. A **single, uniform** type of line infantry equipment which greatly simplify
   the order of battle, and
2. Infantries can fight in either **fire or shock actions**.

Despite its promising feature, due to the limited range, slow firing rate, and
ineffectiveness, fire action can't be the deciding factor to conclude a battle.
This rose the debates around whether line formation (in three-rank, fire
optimised) or column formation (shock optimised) is suitable in the battlefield.
For most European countries, line formation was preferred. To overcome its
weaknesses, lines were deployed contiguously to each one another and covered by
anchoring the flanks to impassible obstacles.

In France during the ancien régime, however, there were prominent military
theorists like *de Folard* and *Saxe* disliked line formation and mistrust the
effectiveness of fire action. Saxe even said that fire action produced more
noise than damage and advocated reversing socket bayonet and returning of plug
socket. Comparing to Saxe, de Folard was more cautious, and stated that fire
action prolonged the battle which causes more casualties. Ultimately, de Folard
claimed, it is the shock action that decided the result of a battle. De Folard,
however, suggested a radical solution of reintroducing pike into infantry
formation. Both advocated the column formation to deliver the shock action.

The French military academy was shaken by the rise of Frederick the Great from
Prussia. As the most prominent military leader during his period, he stated in
his Military Testament of 1768 that "infantry firing more rapidly will
undoubtedly defeat infantry firing more slowly". Thanks to rigorous training,
Prussian infantries were able to fire 5 rounds/minute in ideal situation or 3
rounds/minute in most situation. They outperformed their opponents and were able
to establish **fire supremacy**. Another contribution from Frederick the Great
was his reintroduction of infantry manoeuvrability to the battlefield by
organising Prussian battalions into platoons, and Prussian infantry was able to
march and deploy quickly thanks to their training. (Rothenberg, The Art of
Warfare in the Age of Napoleon, pg 18-19)

**My Note**: Frederick the Great was obviously advocating for line formation and
endorsed fire action.

**Note**: Iron ramrod was used to prevent firearm breaking during reloading.
(Rothenberg, The Art of Warfare in the Age of Napoleon, pg 18-19)

After Seven Years War, both Spain and Russia introduced Prussian drill into
their infantry training. Austria followed suit by adopting Daun's regulation in
1769 which was a close copy of Prussian model. (Rothenberg, The Art of Warfare
in the Age of Napoleon, pg 20)

Mesnil-Durand renewed the debates by advocating shock actions, denying the
effectiveness of both firearm and artillery in his published work in 1755, a
year prior to Seven Years War. He faced contemporary critiques among his
colleagues, especially during and after Seven Years War. Quimby, the author of
the book The Background of Napoleonic Warfare, critiqued him ignoring the
importance of morale and, in his words, "held the naive idea that a tactical
system could guarantee victory". (pg 76)

Although Prussian model was proved effective, the presenter gave majority of the
credits to Frederick the Great, as it doesn't fundamentally change the infantry
warfare. (Weighley, The Age of Battles, pg 267)

During the great tactical debates, there are trial-and-tests during the Seven
Years War from the French side.

Later, Prussian influence dominate after the war due to its model successes.
Baron de Pirch, a Prussian officer entered the French service, introduced the
concept of Points of View. Points of View was defined as *exterior and
distinctive objects chose and determined by general-in-chief to perform and
refine tactical movements accurately*. Pirch stressed the importance of the
precision of movement and advocated for linear warfare. His view was nearly
unanimously supported within the French military academy, which was then
articulated into 1775 Instructions and later 1776 Ordinance. (Quimby, The
Background of Napoleonic Warfare, pg 204). However, 1776 Ordinance received
critiques on their excessive formalism, which resulted in over-complicated
manoeuvres, and excessive reliance upon the ordre mince (thin line). (Quimby,
The Background of Napoleonic Warfare, pg 208-209)

Mesnil-Durand later accepted PoV and conceded by arguing that some form of
actions has to be performed before closing up to enemy formation. He advocated
the deployment of skirmishers since they were more accurate and offered a
difficult target. (Quimby, The Background of Napoleonic Warfare, pg 211)
However, he introduced nationalism to the debate by declaring ordre mince
Prussian and ordre profond (thick line) French.

The Camp of Vassuienx, conducted by Marshal Victor François de Broglie, exposed
the weaknesses of Mesnil-Durand's and Pirch's systems. Majority of French
military from that point decided to seek for a middle ground between
Mesnil-Durand's and Pirch's position. (Quimby, The Background of Napoleonic
Warfare, pg 244)

**Comte de Guibert** devised a system of tactics which later became the basis of
the Ordinance of 1791, which became the basis for French military training for
40 years. (Quimby, The Background of Napoleonic Warfare, pg 106) He argued that
infantry should be trained in both fire and shock actions, but the manual of
arms must be reduced to only 4 manoeuvres. He insisted on simplicity and
essentials. He introduced fire training and bayonet fencing instead of drilling,
the first among his European peers. (Quimby, The Background of Napoleonic
Warfare, pg 114-115) Guibert envisioned a multipurpose infantry that was able to
perform both line or column order. (Ross, From Flintlock ot Rifle, pg 35) He
argued that deep ranks have limited effect on the form of shock, and pointed out
that line formation can also deliver shock with comparable effectiveness.
Guibert argued that infantry has to establish fire superiority to preserved
itself to prevent from destruction or disorder before come in contact with the
enemy. Thus, fire order has to be the primary action. (Quimby, The Background of
Napoleonic Warfare, pg 115)

**My Note**: His father taught some military basics to Guibert and later take
him out on reconnaissances to develop young Guibert's judgment and recognition
of the military features of topography. Guibert was taught by his father when he
was young to raise objections and use his imagination during war game. After the
war game, they would discuss reason for what had done. His father would
encourage questions and disagreement during the discussion. (Quimby, The
Background of Napoleonic Warfare, pg 107)

# Calvary and Their Tactics

# Artillery and Their Tactics

# Tactics and Strategy of Napoleon
